# Functions

## Lesson objectives

_After this lesson students will be able to:_

1. Describe why we use functions
1. Declare a function
1. Invoke a function
1. Properly name a function
1. Write an arrow function with a parameter
1. Write an arrow function with multiple parameters
1. Write an arrow function with a return statement
1. Break a problem down into steps

## Setup

In `student_examples` for today, make a file `functions.js`

Test that a console.log will appear in Terminal when you run the file.

```
$ node functions.js
```

## Describe why we use functions

Using functions is another application of DRY. Don't Repeat Yourself. With a function, you can store code that can be used conveniently as many times as you wish, without having to rewrite the code each time.

You've already been using functions! Let's look at `console.log()`

`console.log()` is a function. It prints things (strings, numbers, etc) to the screen.

It takes `arguments`. So if you want to print something to the screen, you put it in parenthesis.

You've also seen some built in functions like `Math.random()`, which generates a random number.

Another one is `.pop()` which removes the last item from an array.

In JavaScript, if you want to call a function, you always have to have a `()` at end.

There are many built in functions, but as we write our own programs, we'll need to build our own functionality.


## Defining a function

```javascript
const printBoo = () => {
	console.log('======');
	console.log('Boo!');
	console.log('======');
};
```

Always use **`const`** to declare your functions. It would be a strange day when a function would need to be reassigned.

The code will not run yet. The function needs to be **invoked**.

## Invoke a function

Use one line of code to run multiple lines of code

```javascript
printBoo();
```

Simply use the name of the variable and use **parentheses** to invoke the function.

If the parentheses are not included, the function will not run.

The invocation comes **after** the function definition. If you write it beforehand, it will be trying to invoke something that doesn't yet exist according to the interpreter.

This will work:

```javascript
const printBoo = () => {
	console.log('======');
	console.log('Boo!');
	console.log('======');
};

printBoo();
```

VS

This will not:

```javascript
printBoo();

const printBoo = () => {
	console.log('======');
	console.log('Boo!');
	console.log('======');
};
```

When you ask `node` or another JavaScript environment to run the code you've written, it takes your code and loads it into memory and tries to run it.

A lot of the code gets loaded and run from top to bottom from the way you wrote it (as we just saw in the example above).

That's not the whole story! But it goes well beyond week 1 material. If you're finishing the lab early, you can check out more about the process by checking out the articles at the bottom of this markdown.


### Exercise

* Write a function `printSum` that will console.log the result of 10 + 10

**Extra Reps**

* Write a function `printTriangle` that will print these pound signs to the console (there are 5 console.logs inside the function):

	```
	#
	##
	###
	####
	#####
	```

* Make it so that `printTriangle` will print the pound signs using a for loop (there is a for loop and only 1 console.log inside the function).  

* Make it so that when you can invoke the function with the number of pound signs to print (not just hardcoded to print 5)


## Properly name a function

The variable you use for a function should contain a **verb**. Functions **do** something, most often:

* getting data
* setting data
* checking data
* printing data

If the purpose of your function is to check data, for example, use the verb `check` in the variable name.

Example function that contains a conditional:

```javascript
const checkInputLength = (input) => {
	if (input.length > 10) {
		console.log('input length is greater than 10');
	} else {
		console.log('input length is not greater than 10');
	}
};
```
If a function, called `checkInputLength`, does more than just check input, then it is a poor function.

Functions should try to do **only one thing**. Functions can still be very complex: Imagine if you're asking your smart speaker to `turn on the lights` - you are asking it to do one specific thing, under the hood it's probably doing some complex stuff. However, it would be a bummer if it would always `test the fire alarm` whenever you wanted to just `turn on the lights`. Separating functionality into separate functions makes your code more flexible and reusable.


Takeaway: Think about appropriate **verbs** to use in your function variable names. The verbs should indicate the **one thing** that the function does.

Naming functions and variables properly takes practice.

## Write an arrow function with a parameter

The preceding function, `checkInputLength` had a **parameter** called `input`.

Functions can receive input that modify their behavior a bit.  This input is called a **parameter**.

In the below example, the parameter is arbitrarily called `name`. We can call our parameters whatever we want - whatever makes semantic sense.

Using **concatenation** I can put the input into a string:

```javascript
const sayName = (name) => {
	console.log('Hello! My name is ' + name);
}
```

When we _invoke_ the function, we can specify the value of the parameter, this is called an **argument**:

```javascript
sayName("Frodo");
```

We can continue to invoke the function with whatever **arguments** we want:

```javascript
sayName("Merry");
sayName("Pippin");
sayName("Sam");
```

Each time, the output of the function will change to reflect the argument.

### Argument vs Parameter

The **argument** is the input, the **parameter** is how the input is represented in the function.

```javascript
const func = (PARAMETER) => {
	// some code
}

func(ARGUMENT);
```


## Write an arrow function with multiple parameters

A function can take any number of parameters.

```javascript
const calculateArea = (num1, num2) => {
	console.log(num1 * num2);
}
```

When you invoke the function, you generally want to supply the right number of arguments.

```javascript
calculateArea(4, 4)

```
> => 16

### Exercises

* Write a function called `minusOne` that takes a parameter `num`. Assuming the argument is a number, print the argument -1.

	```javascript
	minusOne(10);        // 9
	minusOne(100);       // 99
	minusOne(Infinity);  // Infinity
	```

* Write a function `makeSentence` that takes **three** parameters and **concatenates** them into a fully formed sentence.

	```javascript
	makeSentence('I', 'want', 'chimichangas');
	```

	> => 'Oh boy, do I want chimichangas or what?'

**Extra**

* Write a function called `getLastElement` that takes a parameter `arr`.
* Invoke the function with an **array** as the argument.
* The function should print the **last element** within the array.

	```javascript
	getLastElement([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]);       // 6
	getLastElement(['a', 'b', 'c']);          // 'c'
	getLastElement([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]);   // [4, 5, 6]
	```

	_Hint:_ `arr[arr.length - 1]`


**Extra**

* Write a function `divideThreeNums` that takes **three** parameters and prints the third parameter divided by the result of the second parameter divided by the first.

	```javascript
	divideThreeNums(10, 5, 2)   // 4
	divideThreeNums(30, 2, 9)   // 135
	```

## Write an arrow function with a return statement

Functions can pass information back to whatever line of code invoked them.

A contrived example:

```javascript
const ten = () => {
	return 10;
}

console.log(8 + ten());
```
> => 18

Here `ten()` gets replaced with whatever the `return` statement is.

This is the main difference between `return` and `console.log()`. The output value of a function can not come from a console.log.

```javascript
const ten = () => {
	console.log(10);
}
console.log(8 + ten());
```
> => 10
> => NaN

This is because it is trying to add 8 to `undefined`.

A function is only **defined** if it has a return value.

```javascript
const calculateArea = function(num1, num2) {
	return num1 * num2;
}
```

The `calculateArea` function has a **return value** of `num1` * `num2`. It does not just print to the console.

### use the returned value of an invoked function

Sometimes a returned value will not appear in your console. This is normal. **A return is not a console.log**. To see the return value of a function, you will want to console.log the invocation:

```javascript
console.log(multiply(2, 10));
```

> => 20

Since `multiply` **returns** a value, we can use the return value of `multiply` as an argument to an invocation of `multiply`.

```javascript
console.log(multiply(multiply(2, 3), multiply(9, 4)));
```

> => 216

### return: stopping a function

**RETURN** sends the value of your function immediately. You can use **return** to terminate the function.

Example: will the function return 0 or 1? (It won't return both)

```javascript
const example = (input) => {
	if (input == "none"){
		return 0;
	}
	return 1; // if input is "none" this line will not run
};
```

```javascript
example("none")     // 0
example("two");     // 1
```

## Break a problem down into steps

Write a function that will **return** true if a word is a Palindrome, or will **return** false if not.

* Problem solve one step at a time
* Each step might require research

Work in layers, one layer at a time. Don't jump ahead until each piece has been tested and works.

Determine if each step will require research, and research it.

* reverse the word (how?)
* check if the word is the same as the reverse (how?)
* return true or false

### Small problems

* Write a function that takes two parameters (strings) and returns `true` (Boolean) if the two strings are identical, `false` if not.

* Write a function that takes three parameters (numbers), sums them, converts the sum into a string and returns the string (eg. `"123"`)
	* Use your google-fu to research converting a number into a string
	* Invoke the function a couple of times with different arguments each time

* Experiment
	* What happens if you supply more arguments than there are parameters?
	* What happens if you supply fewer arguments than there are parameters?


	### Extra Reading

	[Hoisting](https://scotch.io/tutorials/understanding-hoisting-in-javascript)

	[Lexical Scope](https://medium.com/@nickbalestra/javascripts-lexical-scope-hoisting-and-closures-without-mystery-c2324681d4be)
